---
title: Slow by Design
date: 2022-06-26
---

A few months ago I started [bullet journaling](https://bulletjournal.com/) after
my brother mentioned that he’d been doing it, and it was working well for
him.[^1] I’d been journaling in [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/) for a while at
that point, but I did not really like having to get on my computer in the
evening right before bed to keep up this habit, and at the end of the day, I’d often
be so tired from chasing a toddler around that I had trouble recalling what I’d
wanted to write down about that day anyway.[^2] Bullet journaling solved both of
these problems by logging events as they happen—or shortly thereafter—on paper.
So in the evenings, I could sit down at the table with my notebook and maybe a
cup of tea to journal, which seemed much more pleasant than going back to my
computer.

The other reason bullet journalling was appealing to me was how it included task
management as part of the practice. Shortly after graduating from college, I
read [Getting Things Done](https://gettingthingsdone.com/) and it changed how I
kept track of tasks. I found that many of the principles in the book worked well
for me, and I tried applying them in a variety of digital task managers.[^3] For
the most part, this worked well, but the one thing I was always really bad at
was the daily/weekly review. If I did them at all, it was usually a cursory
glance through my lists where I’d think to myself, “yep, that looks right”.

In these digital task managers, there was no real consequence for me to skip my
reviews.[^4] The tasks weren’t going anywhere; if they were still relevant, I
was in no danger of losing track of them. If they weren’t really relevant, it
didn’t matter that much because it’s not like they were taking up space, and I
always had systems in place to make sure that things that needed to get done
bubbled to the top automatically. Of course, there was a consequence of allowing
my task lists to become an amalgamation of relevant and irrelevant tasks and
project ideas: other than keeping track of things that _had_ to be done, my task
lists were not helping me focus on projects I cared about, and looking at the
list became discouraging as I looked at all of the tasks I wasn’t doing.

What does all of this have to do with a bullet journal? Well, since a bullet
journal is all paper, you _have_ to do regular reviews. At the very least, once
you’ve filled up a notebook and need to start a new one, you have to look
through all of your incomplete tasks and decide whether or not you’re going to
copy it over into the new book. That’s a review. In practice, these reviews
happen much more frequently because you’ll want to copy incomplete tasks forward
each month (or week) to a clean page so that you don’t have to scour your daily
logs for tasks.

It turned out that, for me, the convenience of digital task managers was
actually undermining my motivation to do regular reviews of my tasks.[^5]
Forcing myself to review my tasks and copy them over or risk losing track of
something important was what it took to get me to start doing meaningful reviews
of my tasks. On top of that, having to copy the tasks by hand adds enough
friction that I’m a little more inclined to let go of tasks and projects that I
don’t really care about anymore.

[^1]: Somehow, despite my proclivity for reading about productivity methods, I
had missed out on the bullet journal craze from a few years back.
[^2]: Being able to remember milestones and funny stories from my kid’s
childhood was the whole reason I was journaling in the first place.
[^3]: [Remember the Milk](rememberthemilk.com),
[OmniFocus](https://www.omnigroup.com/omnifocus),
[Things](https://culturedcode.com/things/), and then Remember the Milk again.
[^4]: Not true.
[^5]: I’m re-reading _Getting Things Done_ at the moment, and in the updated
version, David Allen actually warns about the risk that too much automation
might mean you don’t check in on all of your “open loops” often enough.
